
=== PAGE 169 ===

152 153
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGY• Surgical ligation / Transcatheter Closure 
 ÊPersistence of a symptomatic PDA and failed 2 courses of pharmacological treatment
 ÊIf medical treatment fails or contraindicated 
• In older preterm infant who is asymptomatic, i.e. only cardiac murmur present in an otherwise well 
infant – no treatment required. Follow-up as necessary. Most PDA in this group will close spontaneously.
Pearls and Pitfalls in Management
• There is a higher success rate in closure of PDA if indomethacin is given in the first two weeks of life.
• For infants who fail to respond to initial pharmacological therapy, a second course results in 40 percent 
rate of ductal closure
• Consider different pharmacological agents for the second course therapy if feasible
• Oral ibuprofen has similar efficacy compared to IV ibuprofen

=== PAGE 170 ===

154
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 25:
Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
Introduction
DiagnosisClassificationPersistent pulmonary hypertension (PPHN) of the newborn is a syndrome of failed circulatory adaption at 
birth. It is characterized by
• Elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) resulting in decrease pulmonary flow
• Right (R) to left (L) shunting of deoxygenated blood across the PFO and PDA result in differential 
cyanosis. Oxygen saturation in the lower limb is 5-10% lower than right upper limb.
• Labile hypoxaemia with marked change in oxygen saturation with minimal or no change in settings of 
ventilator due to changes in the volume of R to L shunt.
• PPHN is clinically suspected in near term or term infants who have variable oxygen saturation.
• Physical Examination - some of the infants may have signs of respiratory distress. Single loud second 
heart sound.
• Differential pre and post ductal oxygen saturation (between 5-10%). Lack of differential does not 
preclude PPHN.
• ABG – Hypoxaemia disproportional to degree of lung disease.
• 2D Echocardiography with colour flow doppler confirm diagnosis with right to left shunting at PFO and 
PDA.
• Hyperoxia test if no 2D Echo available: PaO 2>150 mmHg in FiO 2 100% for 5-10 min excludes most CHD. A 
PaO 2 < 150 mmHg doesn’t exclude congenital heart disease or PPHN.
• Chest x-ray – evidence of underlying parenchymal disease e.g. MAS, RDS, pneumonia. Oligaemic lung 
fields in idiopathic PPHN.
• FBC with differential to evaluate for high hematocrit level (polycythaemia) and risk of underlying 
infection.• Underdevelopment:  hypoplastic vasculature e.g., congenital diaphragmatic hernia, pulmonary 
hypoplasia in oligohydramnios secondary to renal disease or chronic leakage of amniotic fluid.
• Maldevelopment:  normal lung with remodeled pulmonary vasculature as in idiopathic PPHN, chronic 
fetal hypoxia
• Maladaptation:  parenchymal lung diseases e.g., Meconium Aspiration Syndrome (MAS), Pneumonia/
sepsis, Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS), asphyxia
• Intrinsic Obstruction: polycythaemia with intravascular obstruction and increase PVR.

=== PAGE 171 ===

154 155
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYDifferential Diagnosis
Management• Differentiating PPHN from cyanotic heart disease soon after admission is important.
• Preductal and postductal oxygen saturations of more than 5-10% or PaO2 differences of 10-20 mmHg 
between right upper limb and lower limbs helps to differentiate PPHN from structural heart disease.
• The diagnosis is confirmed with 2D Echocardiography which may not be available in all hospitals.
PPHN management involves restoration of the cardiopulmonary adaptation and to minimize ventilator- and 
oxygen-induced pulmonary injury.
This includes treatment of the underlying disease, maintenance of normal systemic BP , decrease pulmonary 
vascular resistance and ensure adequate tissue oxygenation.
• Supportive care 
• Maintain normothermia, correct metabolic and hematologic abnormalities e.g., hypoglycemia, 
hypocalcaemia, hypomagnesaemia, polycythaemia and acidosis. Antibiotics if clinically indicated.
• Ensure minimal handling and stimulation
• Provide sedation and analgesia as required to avoid agitation and asynchrony with ventilator, e.g., 
morphine infusion 10-20 mcg/kg/hr.
• In the event of systemic hypotension, a fluid bolus of 10ml/kg of normal saline can be given, 
followed by dopamine 5-10 mcg/kg/min or noradrenaline of 0.05 – 0.5mcg/kg/min. Higher doses 
of dopamine infusion can aggravate PVR disproportionately to systemic vascular resistance (SVR). 
There is some evidence that noradrenaline may selectively reduce PVR and increase SVR.
• Mechanical ventilation
• Avoid underinflation and overinflation of the lungs as this leads to increase in PVR
• Adopt “Gentle” ventilation strategies with optimal PEEP and relatively low PIP or tidal volume (TV) 
for adequate lung expansion. Aim is to limit volutrauma, barotrauma and atelectrauma.
• Consider HFOV if PIP > 28 and TV > 6ml/kg are required to maintain lung expansion and good gas 
exchange.
• Target PaO 2 55-80 mmHg, with permissive hypercapnia and pH 7.30-7.45. Avoid hyperoxaemia.
• Surfactant therapy may be considered in PPHN secondary to parenchymal lung disease - RDS, MAS and 
pneumonia (benefit is greatest for mild to moderate disease).
• Inhaled Nitric Oxide (iNO)
• Potent vasodilator which selectively dilates the pulmonary circulation without decreasing systemic 
B P.
• Indicated in neonates with PPHN with oxygenation index (OI)> 15-25. Start at 20 ppm. Response 
should be fairly rapid.
• Once a sustained response is seen, FiO 2 is gradually weaned to ≤ 60%. iNO can be weaned from 
here on by 5ppm every 4 hours (or as dictated by blood gas). There should be a sustained rise in 
PaO 2 of at least ≥ 60mmHg (pre- ductal SaO 2 ≥ 90%) in between weaning. Once iNO is 5 ppm, wean 
by 1 ppm every 4hours. Gradual weaning prevents rebound pulmonary vasoconstriction.

=== PAGE 172 ===

156
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGY• Sildenafil
• Can be considered for the following indications for treatment of PPHN:
a. An adjuvant to iNO in NO-resistant PPHN or to facilitate weaning of iNO where weaning has 
been difficult or slow
b. Primary treatment of PPHN where iNO is not available or is contraindicated
• Its safety and effectiveness have not been established in large RCTs. Until further evidence is 
available, the initial dosing strategy would include initiating therapy with oral sildenafil at 0.5 mg/
kg/dose 6-hourly and if there is no response, increasing the dose up to a maximum of 2 mg/kg/
dose.
• Response time varies from 20 minutes to 3 hours after oral administration. Duration of treatment 
is not yet well defined, and one approach is to taper off the medication after a clear response and 
improvement is seen in the infant. 
• The treatment should also be discontinued after 6-8 doses if there is no improvement. It should be 
reduced or stopped completely if hypotension develops despite inotropic support.
• Intravenous magnesium sulphate (MgSO 4) can cause reduction of pulmonary artery pressures in animal 
studies. Only observational studies are available showing it can be helpful in infants. It is associated with 
systemic hypotension. In centers without iNO, MgSO 4may be used. A loading dose of 200 mg/kg MgSO 4 
is given intravenously over 20 minutes followed by continuous infusion at the rate of 20- 50mg/kg/h 
to obtain a serum magnesium level between 3 - 5.5 mmol/l. Inotropes may be  required to keep mean 
arterial blood pressure between 40-45 mmHg. Some of the studies commenced on dopamine 5-10mcg/
kg/min prior to starting magnesium therapy.
• Other agents: e.g., Milrinone, Alprostadil (prostaglandin E1) are not recommended to be used without 
supervision and in consultation with a Neonatologist or Paediatric Cardiologist. It is advisable to have 
ECHO facilities readily available for guiding therapeutic decisions in these complex situations.
• ECMO is a supportive measure that allows the neonatal heart and lung to recover from the underlying 
disease in iNO resistant PPHN. It is not available in this country. Newer therapies – Superoxide 
dismutase, arginine, bosentan and citrulline are under investigation
• Nutritional support should not be overlooked in the overall management of the infant.
• Developmental outcomes – long term multidisciplinary follow up is necessary as PPHN is associated 
with neurodevelopmental, cognitive and hearing abnormalities.

=== PAGE 173 ===

156 157
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 26:
Ophthalmia Neonatorum 
Definition
Aetiology 
GonococcalDiagnosisConjunctivitis occurring in the first 28 days of life with clinical signs of erythema and oedema of the 
eyelids and palpebral conjunctiva, purulent eye discharge with one or more polymorphonuclear cell per oil 
immersion field on a Gram stained conjunctival smear.
Sexually transmitted bacteria ( Neisseria gonorrhoea, Chlamydia trachomatis ), non-sexually transmitted 
bacteria mainly from gastrointestinal tract and skin,  virus (adenovirus, herpes virus and enterovirus) and 
chemical. 
• Most important bacteria by its potential to damage vision. 
• Typically presents with profuse exudate and swelling of the eyelids  2 to 5 days after birth.
• Without treatment, the infection can extend from superficial epithelial layers into the subconjunctival 
connective tissue and the cornea, leading to ulceration, scarring, and visual impairment. 
• The infant should be hospitalized and observed for response to therapy and for disseminated disease 
(e.g. arthritis, sepsis, meningitis)  
• Presumptive treatment should be started after obtaining cultures in high risk group (e.g. mother with 
no prenatal care, history of sexually transmitted diseases (STD), or substance abuse)
• Treatment: 
 ÊSystemic: Ceftriaxone 25-50mg/kg (max. 250 mg) IV or IM single dose, or Cefotaxime 100 mg/kg IV 
or IM single dose (preferred if premature or hyperbilirubinaemia present) 
 ÊThe eyes should be irrigated frequently with sterile normal saline until the discharge clears. Topical 
antibiotic therapy alone is inadequate.
 ÊDisseminated infections : Ceftriaxone 25-50mg/kg/day IV or IM in single daily dose for 7 days, or 
Cefotaxime 25mg/kg/dose every 12 hours for 7 days and  10-14 days for meningitis.
 ÊNote: Ceftriaxone is not recommended for use  in preterm infants, neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia and 
concurrent administration in calcium containing solutions
• For asymptomatic infants whose mothers have untreated gonococcal infection, treatment with a single 
dose of one of the following: Ceftriaxone 25-50mg/kg (max. 250 mg) IV or IM single dose, or Cefotaxime 
100 mg/kg IV or IM single dose or Ceftazidime 50mg/kg IV or IM single dose.  
• Preventive measure is the most effective by diagnosing and treat the infection in pregnant women.• Essentially a clinical diagnosis 
• Laboratory diagnosis to determine aetiology 
• Eye swab for Gram stain (fresh specimen to reach laboratory in 30 mins) 
• Gram stain of intracellular gram negative diplococci - high sensitivity and specificity for Neisseria 
gonorrhoea. 
• Eye swab for culture and sensitivity. 
• Conjunctival scraping for indirect fluorescent antibody identification for Chlamydia 
• Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) - gold standard for diagnosing Chlamydia (not available in 
Malaysia)

=== PAGE 174 ===

158
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYChlamydia
Other bacterial causes
Important Notes Herpes simplex virus • Unilateral or bilateral conjunctivitis with peak incidence between 5 to 14 days of life. 
• Eye discharge is initially copious then becoming mucopurulent. It is associated with eye swelling and 
chemosis.
• Untreated infants may have persistent conjunctivitis for months that may result in corneal and 
conjunctival scarring.
• Treatment : 
 ÊEmpirical treatment until the result is available.
 ÊOral azithromycin 20mg/kg once daily for 3 days.
 ÊErythromycin base 50mg/kg/d in 4 divided doses for 14 days, is an alternative.
• Note: Caution both azithromycin and erythromycin are associated with increased risk of 
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis 
 ÊTopical therapy is not effective.
• Includes Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus viridans, Haemophilus, E.coli, Klebsiella species and 
Pseudomonas. Most are hospital acquired conjunctivitis which can be treated with topical antibiotics 
except for Pseudomonas. 
• Ophthalmia neonatorum caused by Pseudomonas is rare but may cause corneal perforation, 
endophthalmitis and blindness. These infants need assessment by an ophthalmologist and require a 
combination of systemic and topical aminoglycosides with occasional subconjunctival injection. 
• Treatment:
 ÊLocal: Chloramphenicol, gentamicin eye ointment 0.5%, both eyes (Change according to sensitivity, 
duration according to response), or in non-responsive cases refer to ophthalmologist and consider 
Fucithalmic, Ceftazidime 5% ointment bd to qid for a week. Eye toilet 
 ÊLocal treatment may be unnecessary if systemic treatment is given. 
• Refer infants to an ophthalmologist for assessment. 
• Ophthalmia neonatorum due to gonococcal or Chlamydia trachomatis  infection is a notifiable disease 
• Check VDRL of the infant to exclude associated congenital syphilis and screen for C. trachomatis  and 
HIV. 
• If positive, the parents should be referred to STD clinic for further assessment and management. • Uncommon, accounting less than 1% of ophthalmia cases
• High index of suspicion in infants with unilateral chemosis, serosanguineous discharge that 
rarely becomes purulent, presence of vesicular lesions surrounding eyelids or oral ulcers and 
lymphadenopathy
• Early detection and prompt treatment to prevent complications including disseminated disease and 
meningoencephalitis.
• Systemic treatment 
 ÊIV Acyclovir 30mg/kg/d in 3 divided doses for 14 days 
 ÊTopical 0.15% Ganciclovir or 1% Trifluridine

=== PAGE 175 ===

158 159
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 27:
Perinatally Acquired Varicella and Postnatal exposure to 
Varicella infection
Introduction
• In maternal infection (onset of rash) within 7 days before and 7 days after delivery 17-30% develops 
neonatal varicella with lesions appearing 5-10 days of life. Mortality can be as high as 20% since these 
infants have not acquired maternal protecting antibodies. Cause of death is due to severe pulmonary 
disease or widespread necrotic lesions of viscera.
• When maternal varicella occurs 7-21 days before delivery, lesions typically appear in the first 4 days 
of life and prognosis is good with no associated mortality. The mild course is probably due to the 
production and transplacental passage of maternal antibodies that modify the course of illness in 
newborns.
• Infants born to mothers who develop varicella between 7 days before delivery or 7 days after delivery 
should receive as prophylaxis 
• Varicella Zoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) 125 IU IM as soon as possible after delivery or within 
96 hours of initial exposure (to reduce the occurrence of complications and fatal outcomes). 
Attenuation of disease might still be achieved with administration of VariZIGTM up to 10 days after 
exposure.
• For infants born to mothers who develop varicella between 5 days before and 2 days post delivery, 
add IV acyclovir 15 mg/kg/dose over 1 hour every 8hrly (total 45 mg/kg/day) for 5 days.
• If Zoster immunoglobulin is not available give IV Immunoglobulin 400 mg/kg (this is less effective) 
AND IV Acyclovir 15 mg/kg/dose over 1 hour every 8hrly (total 45 mg /kg/day) for 5 days.
• On sending home, warn parents to look out for new vesicles or baby being unwell, for 28 days 
after exposure. If so, parents to bring the infant to the nearest hospital as soon as possible (62% of 
healthy such neonates given VZIG after birth)
• If vesicles develop, give Acyclovir 15 mg/kg/dose over 1 hour every 8hrly (total 30-45 mg /kg/day) for 
7-10 days.
• Women with varicella at time of delivery should be isolated from their newborns, breast-feeding is 
contraindicated. The newborn infant can receive expressed breast milk in the meantime and breast-
feeding commenced when all the mother’s lesions have crusted.
• Neonates with varicella lesions should be isolated from other infants but not from their mothers.
• It has been generally accepted that passive immunization of the neonate can modify the clinical course 
of neonatal varicella but it does not prevent the disease and, although decreased, the risk of death is 
not completely eliminated
• Infants whose mothers develop Zoster before or after delivery have maternal antibodies and they will 
not need VZIG.
• Recommend immunisation of family members who are not immune.

=== PAGE 176 ===

160
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYPostnatal exposure to varicella in the hospitalAssessing the significance of varicella exposure
• Give VZIG within 96 hours to those who have been exposed if they fit the following criteria: 
• All infants born at < 28 weeks gestation or who weighed < 1000g at birth irrespective of maternal 
history of chickenpox. This group has increased risk of severe varicella up to 6 weeks after birth.
• All preterm infants born at ≥28 weeks gestation whose mothers have not had chickenpox or whose 
status is unknown.
• Infants with significant non-maternal exposure to VZV within the first 7 days of their life if mother 
have never had varicella infection
• All immunocompromised infants such as those undergoing immunosuppressive therapy, have 
malignant disease or are immunodeficient, severe underlying skin disorder.
• Note that infants who are more than 60 days old or has been given blood transfusion may be 
VZIG negative even though there is a positive history of maternal varicella – to counsel parents to 
observe for varicella lesions so infants can be treated early
• Monitor at risk infant up till end of incubation period i.e. 28 days post initial exposure. Non-
immunocompromised infant who can be monitored closely at home and have easy access to 
hospital, can be discharged earlier.
• Isolate infant who has varicella infection and susceptible infants who have been exposed to the 
virus. Treatment of symptomatic infants with acyclovir as above.
• Screen exposed, susceptible hospital staff for skin lesions, fever, headache and systemic symptoms. 
They are potentially infective 10-21 days after exposure and should be placed on sick leave 
immediately should any symptoms or skin lesion arise. If possible, they can also be reassigned 
during the incubation period to areas where the infants are not as susceptible or non-patient care 
areas.
Other notes
• In hospitals, airborne transmission of VZV has been demonstrated when varicella has occurred in 
susceptible persons who have had no direct contact with the index case-infant.
• Incubators are not positive pressure air flow & therefore do not provide isolation. Neonates may not be 
protected given that they are frequently open for nursing purposes.
•  All staff should preferably be screened, and susceptible staff vaccinated for varicella before 
commencing work in neonatal, oncology and ICU wards. If not, they should receive post exposure 
vaccination as soon as possible unless contraindications exist such as pregnancy. Post-exposure VZIG to 
be given to non-immune pregnant staff up to 10 days post initial exposure to prevent complications in 
the mother and may reduce the risk of fetal varicella syndrome.
• The use of VZIG following exposure does not necessarily prevent varicella and may prolong the 
incubation period by > 1 week and hence signs or symptoms should be observed for 28 days post 
exposure.
• VZIG is not presently recommended for healthy full-term infants who are exposed postnatally, even 
if their mothers have no history of varicella infection. To emphasise to parents to bring back early for 
treatment with acyclovir if any skin lesion appears within the next 3 weeks.• The index case could be the health care professional, a family member or a patient
• There should be close contact with the index case: 
• Maternal/neonatal contact.
• Contact between health care professional or family member and patient
• Contact in the same room, including large open wards, for 15 minutes or more.
• Face to face contact, as in conversation.

=== PAGE 177 ===

160 161
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 28:
Management of Perinatal Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) transmission 
(Exposed Infants)
Introduction
1. Postnatal Management
2. Preterm and/or low birth weight infantsTable 1: Hepatitis B Newborn Prophylaxis Protocol
• Low birth weight and preterm newborn infants have decreased immune response  to Hepatitis B 
containing vaccines compared to full-term infants. 
• For low-birth-weight infants (<1800 g) and/or those born at <32 weeks’ gestation (irrespective of 
birth weight), it is recommended that the infants complete 4-doses Hepatitis B schedule vaccination 
(the birth dose is not considered part of the vaccination series)The risk of a child developing chronic HBV infection is about 90% when infected perinatally. In Malaysia, 
universal hepatitis B immunization of newborns has been implemented since 1989.  
*Do not count the birth dose as part of the vaccine series.
# High risk pregnant women who are identified as being at risk for HBV infection during pregnancy (e.g., having more than one sex 
partner during the previous 6 months, been evaluated, or treated for an STI, recent or current injection-drug use, or having had an 
HBsAg-positive sex partner)Maternal HBsAg status Recommendation
HBsAg ± HBeAg positive • Administer HBIG (Hepatitis B Immunoglobulin) 
• Administer single-antigen hepatitis B vaccine (birth dose) * within 12 
hours of birth. 
• If possible, both should be given at the same time but in separate 
thighs  using separate needles and syringes.
• Complete the 4-doses Hepatitis B vaccine series.
• (3 Hepatitis B-containing combination vaccine at ages 2, 3, and 5 
months with a booster at 18 months (according to the Malaysian 
National Immunization Programme)
Negative • Administer single-antigen Hepatitis B vaccine* within 24 hours of 
birth. 
• Complete the 4-doses Hepatitis B vaccine series
Unknown (with high risk 
factors #)• Test mother for HBsAg.
• Administer single-antigen hepatitis B vaccine* within 12 hours of birth
• Give HBIG if test positive (must be given within 7 days of birth )
• Complete the 4-doses Hepatitis B vaccine series 

=== PAGE 178 ===

162
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYFigure 1: Administration of Birth Dose of Hepatitis B vaccine by Birth weight and Maternal HBsAg status
3. Postvaccination serologic testing (PVST)
• PVST is done to evaluate the effect of hepatitis B immunization and identifying HBV infection in 
infants.  The recommended testing for the infant:
1)  Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and level of anti-HBs (antibody to HBsAg) 
2)  Timing of measurement:  
a) 9-12 months of age, OR
b) 1–2 months after the final dose of the vaccine series (if the series is delayed).Modified from American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases, Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Elimination of 
perinatal hepatitis B; providing the first vaccine dose within 24 hours of birth. Pediatrics,2017


=== PAGE 179 ===

162 163
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYTable 2: Interpretation of Postvaccination Serologic Testing Results 4. Interpretation of PVST Results 
PVST results Follow-up Management
1a) Anti-HBs - Positive 
Antibody Level ≥10 mIU/mL 
  b) HBsAg - NegativeNo follow up necessary. Infant is protected.
2a) Anti-HBs – Negative
Antibody Level <10mIU/mL
  b) HBsAg - NegativeNo response and infant is susceptible for infection. 
Needs additional follow up and vaccines
Revaccination with an additional dose of monovalent Hepatitis B vaccine 
and receive PVST 1–2 months later. 
If repeated PVST still shows no response (anti-HBs remains <10 mIU/mL) 
the infant should receive two additional doses of monovalent Hepatitis B 
vaccine to complete the second series, followed by PVST 1–2 months after 
the final dose.
3a) Anti-HBs -Negative
Antibody Level < 10mIU/mL
  b) HBsAg - positiveInfant is infected with Hepatitis B.  
Consult with the Paediatric Gastroenterologist for appropriate 
management and follow-up. 
5. Breastfeeding Caution:
6. CounsellingBreastfeeding is not a contraindication for infants born to mothers who are HBsAg positive. Mothers 
who were not treated with antivirals during pregnancy are encouraged to breastfeed if their newborns 
have received combined immunoprophylaxis composed of HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine.  1. Do not test the infant before 9 months of age, to avoid detecting anti-HBs from the HBIG given at birth 
and to maximize the likelihood of detecting late HBV infection.
2. Due to a decrease in antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen (anti-HBs), PVST should not be performed 
after 12 months of age
Counsel the mother regarding the necessity and importance of the following: 
1. How hepatitis B spreads and how to prevent spreading it. 
2. The need for and importance of her infant to complete the primary Hepatitis B vaccination program. 
3. Testing her infant between 9 and 12 months of age to make sure the infant is protected and has no 
infection. 
4. The need to get medical follow-up for herself and family members who may be HBV carriers.

=== PAGE 180 ===

164
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 29:
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia 
Introduction
Risk factors for Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
Diagnosis
ManagementDiagnosis based on prospective NICHD Jensen 2019 studyBronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is chronic lung disease that occurs in premature infants. Survivors with 
BPD have serious consequences ranging from chronic cardiopulmonary morbidity to growth failure and 
developmental delay. 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia is a multifactorial disease affecting over 35% of extremely preterm infants
Inflammation is one of the key drivers in the pathogenesis of BPD. Interactions of many antenatal, 
intrapartum and postnatal risk factors induce ongoing inflammation and subsequent aberrant repair 
process in the preterm lungs.
Preterm <32 weeks gestational age with persistent parenchymal lung disease confirmed by radiography and 
at 36 weeks post menstrual age requires the following intervention
Prevention strategies 
a. Avoid intubation and mechanical ventilation. Consider early CPAP use at delivery room for 
spontaneously breathing preterm infants
b. If invasive ventilation is required, to consider using volume targeted ventilation and early timely 
extubation to non-invasive respiratory support
c. Minimally invasive surfactant therapy (MIST)/Less Invasive Surfactant Administration (LISA) has been 
shown to reduce incidence of BPD.Prenatal risk factors Perinatal risk factors Postnatal risk factors
Intrauterine growth 
restriction
Lack of antenatal 
corticosteroids
Maternal chorioamnionitis
Preeclampsia
Maternal smokingLow gestational age
Low birth weight
Male gender
Low Apgar score
Perinatal asphyxiaMechanical ventilation
Supplemental oxygen
Sepsis
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Systemic inflammatory response
Patent ductus arteriosus
GRADESInvasive 
ventilationNIPPV/NCPAPNasal cannula 
flow>2L/minNasal cannula 
flow<2L/min
I MILD - - - FIO 2>21%
II MODERATE - FIO 2>21% FIO 2>21% -
III SEVERE FIO 2>21% - - -

=== PAGE 181 ===

164 165
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYd. Caffeine administration to all infants <30 weeks’ gestation reduces the risk of BPD and shortens 
duration of ventilation and exposure to supplemental oxygen.
e. In preterm infants, target oxygen saturation between 90%-95% ranges
f. Postnatal Corticosteroids use
• Postnatal systemic corticosteroids therapy improves short term lung function and pulmonary 
outcome of infants with established BPD and reduces risk of BPD in high-risk preterm infants.
• Postnatal steroid therapy is used to prevent and treat BPD. Its use is associated with short and long-
term complications.
• To minimize the complications, late systemic use (>8 days) is recommended over early corticosteroids. 
• Current recommendations are that postnatal corticosteroids therapy should be reserved for preterm 
infants who are ventilator-dependent after the first 7-14 days of life and any course should be of low 
dose and of short duration to facilitate endotracheal extubation
• Suggested low dose dexamethasome regimen (DART) (total cumulative dose 0.89mg/kg)
• 75mcg/kg/dose 12 hourly for 3 days then
• 50mcg/kg/dose 12 hourly for 3 days then
• 25 mcg/kg/dose 12 hourly for 2 days then
• 10 mcg/kg/dose 12 hourly for 2 day*Parents should be counselled on the complications of corticosteroid therapyShort term side effects Long term side effects
Hyperglycemia
Hypertension
Intestinal /gastric perforation
Late onset sepsis
Adrenal suppressionIncreased risk of cerebral palsy and 
neurodevelopmental impairment
Hypertrophied cardiomyopathy
Severe Retinopathy of prematurity
Long Term Management of Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
General MeasuresFor those with established BPD, the aim of management should be to decrease the risk of early childhood 
death, prevent cardiovascular disease, optimize growth and ensure appropriate neurodevelopmental 
outcomes.
a. Adequate nutrition for high energy needs in infants with BPD to ensure adequate lung growth and 
repair.
b. Consider fluid restriction at 150mls/kg/day with caloric-dense feeds to improve lung function and gas 
exchange. (Low evidence)
c. Immunization – following the national immunization schedule for Malaysia. Passive immunization 
e.g. Palivizumab or Nirsevimab should be considered for RSV prevention in infants born ≤28 weeks’ 
gestation with an established diagnosis of BPD. Consider annual Infuenza/Flu immunization for the high-
risk BPD cohort. 
d. Family counselling regarding awareness of environmental irritants, mainly secondary smoke inhalation 
and minimizing risk of infection. This is to minimize further lung damage.
e. Monitoring with lung imaging for those with severe BPD, severe respiratory symptoms and/or recurrent 
hospitalizations for respiratory morbidity.

=== PAGE 182 ===

166
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYOxygen supplementationPharmacological intervention
a. All infants with BPD and extreme preterm infants (<28 weeks’ gestation) should ideally have an 
overnight pulse oximetry monitoring prior to discharge, with or without oxygen
b. For infants with BPD, supplemental oxygen therapy is recommended to maintain a minimum mean SpO 2 
of 93%
c. All aspects of care need to be optimized prior to initiation of long-term oxygen therapy (consider airway 
problems, assess for pulmonary hypertension, manage reflux disease and nutritional requirements, as 
well as complete repair of inguinal hernia by 36 weeks).
d. Home oxygen therapy will require a multi-disciplinary team approach, with a referral to the Paediatric 
Respiratory team. Four aspects to be considered are:
• The infant needs to be fit for discharge
• A dedicated caretaker for the infant
• Suitable and safe home 
• Availability of equipment.
e. Follow-up should be arranged in an ambulatory setting to facilitate patient care.
The clinical course in infants with BPD is complex, with multiple morbidities, frequent hospitalizations 
and often poor continuity of care. The formation of multi-disciplinary care has the potential to improve 
outcomes and survival in these infants.a. Bronchodilators can be considered if there are features of airway hyperreactivity. Routine use is not 
recommended unless there is clinical evidence of acute bronchoconstriction from acute pulmonary 
decompensation and needs to be weaned off as soon as no long-term benefit is seen. Be aware of the 
malacic airway in this group of infants.
b. Inhaled corticosteroids can be considered in subgroups with severe BPD, severe respiratory symptoms, 
recurrent hospitalization due to respiratory morbidity and symptoms not controlled with regular use 
of bronchodilators. Clinical effects should be closely monitored during a trial period and discontinued 
when no positive impact or benefit is seen.f. Acute episodes of pulmonary decompensation, in the form of exacerbations should be managed 
based upon the underlying aetiology (infections, severe airway reactivity, pulmonary oedema, 
tracheobronchomalacia, etc.)
g. Assess for complications of BPD, including monitoring for pulmonary hypertension, systemic 
hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy, cardiac dysfunction, growth failure and neurodevelopmental 
impairment.

=== PAGE 183 ===

166 167
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 6         NEONATOLOGYChapter 30:
Non- invasive Ventilation in Preterm Infants
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
Biphasic CPAP, Bilevel CPAP, Duo PAP • CPAP is an established mode of non-invasive ventilation (NIV) for infants.
• Clinical benefits:  improves oxygenation, maintains functional residual capacity (FRC), decreases apnea, 
reduces work of breathing and splints the upper airways.
• Limitations and risk:  nasal trauma, air leak syndromes, gastric distension (“CPAP belly”)
• Clinical indications:  
a. Primary mode of respiratory support - as first line respiratory support for preterm infants. It can be 
used shortly after birth in spontaneous breathing preterm infants as prophylactic or early CPAP to 
prevent intubation and mechanical ventilation (MV).
b. Post-extubation respiratory support 
c. Treatment of apnea of prematurity
• Clinical management:
a. Optimum CPAP pressure is not known and depends on the underlying pathophysiology and severity 
of illness.
b. CPAP pressures are generally set between 5-8 cm H 2O. Higher CPAP pressures can be associated 
with air leaks.
c. Starting at a pressure 5-6 cm H 2O and increasing by 1 cm H2O increments, adjusting based on O2 
requirements and clinical assessment of work of breathing (WOB)
d. Short binasal prongs and nasal mask are recommended over single or nasopharyngeal prongs.
e. Various types of devices may be used to deliver CPAP -no definitive evidence to suggest which CPAP 
device is superior. 
f. It is more important for the clinical team to be familiar with the devices available and their 
management.
g. The evidence regarding the optimum method of weaning is unclear. Gradual weaning of pressure 
has higher chance of success compared to sudden stopping of CPAP (sudden wean).
• Flow drivers are used to deliver alternating cycles of low pressure and high-pressure at pre-specified 
intervals 
• The high pressures (PIP) used vary between devices and generally range between 9 - 11cm H 2O. The 
high and low pressures difference is ≤ 4 cm H 2O
• The inspiratory time (IT) is longer (0.5–1 s) and respiratory rates are lower at 20-40/min.

=== PAGE 184 ===

168
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 6         NEONATOLOGYNasal intermittent positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV)
Heated Humidified High Flow Nasal Cannula (HHHFNC)• NIPPV provides two levels of pressure: 
a. A constant positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and 
b. A higher positive inspiratory pressure (PIP) without an endotracheal tube. 
• Set PIP typically in the range of 15 - 22cm H 2O. 
• The rate and IT for the PIP is set, making this a time-cycled pressure limited mode of NIV, mimicking 
invasive mechanical ventilation.
• NIPPV can be synchronized (S-NIPPV) or non-synchronized (NS-NIPPV). Synchronized NIPPV is preferred 
to non-synchronized NIPPV.
• Most of the conventional mechanical ventilator can deliver NS-NIPPV
• S-NIPPV can be delivered by some ventilators with specific triggering devices.
• Clinical indications of Biphasic CPAP, Bilevel CPAP, Duo PAP and NIPPV: 
a. Primary mode of respiratory support in situations where higher mean airway pressure than CPAP 
may be required.
b. Post extubation respiratory support 
c. Treatment of apnea of prematurity
• HHHFNC uses smaller binasal prongs (cannula) than CPAP , with a simpler interface, and delivers heated, 
humidified gas at flows of more than 1 L/min.
• Typical flows between 2-8L/min is used. 
• The pharyngeal distending pressure is not monitored and dependent on multiple factors: flow rate, size 
of nasal cannula, leak, airway anatomy, and weight of the infants.
• Do not occlude the nostrils and the preferred cannula to nares ratio ~ 0.5.
• Limited data on its use in extremely preterm infants < 28 weeks’ gestational age or term infants
• Clinical benefits: less nasal trauma, reduced pneumothorax, more comfortable for the neonate and 
parent and nursing staff preference
• Clinical indications:
a. Primary mode of respiratory support is associated with a higher rate of treatment failure compared 
with CPAP and is not recommended.
For clinicians and units who wish to use as primary respiratory support, it is recommended that its 
use is limited to infants ≥ 30 weeks’ gestation and FiO 2 30% on admission.*
b. Post-extubation respiratory support in infants ≥ 28 weeks’ gestation.* 
*CPAP should be available as a ‘rescue therapy’ to avoid intubation and MV in the event of failure.
c. Apnea of prematurity - There is insufficient evidence to recommend its use 
d. ‘Weaning’ from CPAP . There is insufficient evidence to recommend its use. However, given its 
benefits, it may be an alternative in those infants with  nasal trauma from CPAP .
• Clinical management
a. Start at gas flow 4-6L /min. Choice of starting gas flow should consider the gestational age, disease 
pathophysiology and current clinical status (O 2 requirement and work of breathing)
b. Consider escalating to CPAP if FiO 2 consistently > 0.4, continues to have increased work of 
breathing, increase rates of apnea or bradycardia.
c. There is no consensus on how to wean HHHFNC. Consider weaning FiO 2 to < 0.3 before weaning 
flow.

=== PAGE 185 ===

168 169
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
RESPIRATORYSection 7

=== PAGE 186 ===

170
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 7         RESPIRATORYChapter 31:
Asthma
Definition
Diagnosis of asthma in children younger than 5 years old• Asthma is a heterogenous disease with many phenotypes
• It is characterized by chronic airway inflammation, leading to variable/recurrent respiratory symptoms 
(such as wheeze, shortness of breath, chest tightness and cough) AND variable expiratory airflow 
limitation.
• Evidence of  variable expiratory airflow limitation is demonstrated by:
• Low FEV1/FVC ratio (at least once during diagnostic process) 
• Significant bronchodilator response/reversibility: > 12% improvement in FEV1 in children < 12 
years old (> 12% AND > 200 ml improvement in > 12 years old) in response to administration of a 
bronchodilator PEF improvement 
 ͳPEF improvement >15% post bronchodilator can be used if spirometry is not available.
• Average diurnal variability >15% in children
• > 12% improvement in FEV1 from baseline in children after 4 weeks of anti-inflammatory asthma 
treatment (>12% AND > 200 ml improvement in > 12 years old).
• Fractional Exhaled Nitric Oxide (FeNO) is an invasive biomarker of airway inflammation; thus, it helps to 
establish asthma diagnosis and monitor effectiveness of asthma medication (if the test is available).
• Whenever possible, try to document evidence for the diagnosis of asthma before starting controller 
treatment (it is more difficult to confirm diagnosis afterwards)The prevalence of asthma in Malaysian children (up to 18 years old) is 7.1% based on the Third National 
Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS III) in 2006.
A diagnosis of asthma in young children is often challenging as cough and wheeze are common symptoms 
either due to preschool wheezing disorders (i.e., viral-induced wheeze or multi-triggered wheeze) or acute 
bronchiolitis.
The diagnosis is mainly based on symptoms patterns combined with a careful clinical history and physical 
findings. 
A structured clinical assessment to assess the probability of asthma should be based on: 
A history of recurrent episodes of symptoms (symptoms of wheeze, cough, breathlessness and chest 
tightness that vary over time, usually precipitated by allergens, exercise, environmental triggers (e.g., 
tobacco smoke, dust, air pollutants) or respiratory infections. The variation of symptoms may occur 
spontaneously or with usage of β2 agonist bronchodilator and ideally demonstrated by variable peak flow 
measurement, if feasible.
• Recorded observation of wheeze heard by a healthcare professional
• Personal/family history of other atopic conditions (atopic eczema, allergic rhinitis) or asthma in first 
degree relative
• No other features to suggest alternative diagnoses

=== PAGE 187 ===

170 171
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian HospitalsSection 7         RESPIRATORYA probability-based approach  (Table 1), based on the pattern of symptoms during and between viral 
respiratory infections may be helpful in the diagnosis, allowing individual decisions to be made about 
whether to give a  trial of controller treatment.
Table 1: Probability-based Approach of Asthma
Some Pointers:
1. For high probability of asthma, a therapeutic trial of low to moderate dose ICS for at least 6 weeks  may 
be commenced and clinical improvement with preventer treatment and worsening of symptoms when 
treatment is stopped is suggestive of asthma.
2. For low probability of asthma, evaluate for other diagnosis.
3. For intermediate probability of asthma, watchful waiting or a diagnostic trial of low dose of ICS for 3 
months and assess response.Clinical History Physical Examination
Current symptoms
Pattern of symptoms
Precipitating factors
Present treatment
Previous hospital/PICU admission
 Typical exacerbations
Home/school environment
Impact on life style
History of atopy
Response to prior treatment
Prolonged URTI symptoms
Family historySigns of chronic illness
Harrison’s sulci
Hyperinflated chest
Eczema/dry skin
Hypertrophied turbinate
Signs in acute exacerbation
Tachypnoea
Wheeze, rhonchi
Hyperinflated chest
Accessory muscles
Cyanosis
Drowsiness
TachycardiaImportant Points to Note in:
Note: Absence of Physical Signs Does Not Exclude Asthma!
Probability of asthma: Low Moderate High
Duration of symptoms 
(cough, wheeze, heavy 
breathing) during URTI< 10 days > 10 days > 10 days
Number of exacerbations 2-3 per year >3 per year, or 
severe episodes>3 per year, or severe episodes
Interval symptoms (between 
episodes or exacerbations)No symptoms occasional cough 
or wheezecough and/or wheeze during 
play/ laughing/exercise
Atopy Nil Nil Present
Family history of  asthma Nil Nil Present

=== PAGE 188 ===

172
PAEDIATRIC PROTOCOLS
5th Edition For Malaysian Hospitals
Section 7         RESPIRATORYRed Flags and Pointers of Other Diagnosis:
• Failure to thrive
• Neonatal or very early onset of symptoms 
• Vomiting/feeding problems with respiratory symptoms
• Chronic wet cough (> 4 weeks)
• Fixed monophonic wheeze/stridor
• Failure to respond to controller medications
• No associations of symptoms with typical triggers (eg. URTI)
• Focal / asymmetrical lung findings 
• Cardiovascular signs
• Finger clubbing
• Hypoxaemia outside context of acute illness
The long-term goals of asthma management for in all age groups are to achieve good symptoms control 
and risk reduction of asthma exacerbations, asthma-related death, and persistent airflow limitation and 
medications side-effects.
Good asthma control can be achieved through careful assessment, adjustment of medications and review of 
treatment response.
Treatment is individualised, taking into account patient’s own goals and preference. 
Partnership and effective communication skills are important part of management of any chronic diseases.
Inhaled Corticosteroids (ICS) are the recommended preventer drug for asthma treatment. 
Newly diagnosed patients should be properly evaluated as to their degree of asthma severity or underlying 
background asthma (Table 3) and treatment should be started at the most appropriate step to the initial 
severity (Table 4 & 5) A positive family history of allergic disease or the presence of atopy/allergic sensitisation in the child with 
recurrent wheeze may predict the likelihood of evolving into atopic asthma and its risk may be determined 
by the modified Asthma Predictive Index (mAPI) (Table 2).  
Major Criteria Minor Criteria
Parental history of asthma Eosinophilia (>4%)
Atopic Eczema (doctor diagnosed) Wheeze unrelated to colds 
Aero- allergen sensitisation Allergic sensitisation to food i.e. milk, egg, peanuts
MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC ASTHMA Table 2: Modified Asthma Predictive Index (mAPI)
Four or more wheeze episodes per year with at least 1 major OR 2 minor criterias
